Add metrics ingestion documentation (#2247)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/tutorials/observability/data-ingestion/metrics/_index.md

---
title: Ingest metrics into the Observability Platform
linkTitle: Metrics

> description: How to ingest new metrics in the Observability Platform

Reviewer: Something like 

description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service

That would also be 79 chars resolving the Front Matter Problem

Author: ```suggestion
description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service
```

menu:
  principal:

>     parent: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion

Reviewer: I thought you wanted to take the flat structure now? Looking at it I feel that this 3 levels down are a bit too many clicks to get there without any added value. Wdyt?

Author: That's what I originally thought but then I found that that worked quite well with the separation but maybe this does not need 3 layers?

I was definetly thinking that later on we would have something like:

observavbility
  data-ingestion
  data-exploration
    creating dashboards
    exploring metrics and logs
  exporting-data

So i added the 3 layers now but i can change this

Reviewer: Yeah, guess it's fine that way. Let's keep it for now

    identifier: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion-metrics
weight: 50
last_review_date: 2024-07-11
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - What is a ServiceMonitor?
  - What is a PodMonitor?
  - How do I ingest new metrics?
  - Why do my clusters run the Prometheus Operator?
---

> By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with the [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set monitoring agents (multiple [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode`) to be able to collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with the [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of multiple [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode` functioning as monitoring agents to be able to collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.
```

> As no workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, we decided to base our monitoring configuration on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` CRDs provided by the Prometheus Operator. Those allow us to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platforms monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it is based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator. 

Those allow you to:
```

*   First use of CRD we should use the full name and add the abbrevation in brackets 
*   In docs customers don't need to know our perspective. Think about it, docs are somewhat easier to read if they take on your perspective as a reader, because you're interested in understanding and achieving something, not in emphasizing with the product team :)

> 

Reviewer: remove this line break so the 

> Those allow you to: 

and the bullet points are one after another

Author: This line break is required by the linter :D

> - define where the metrics we want to ingest are (e.g. container, port)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define where the metrics you want to ingest are (for example the container or port)
```

> - transform metrics before ingesting them (e.g. dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Transform metrics before ingesting them (for example dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels)
```

> If you want to read more about the CRDs, feel free to look at their [API](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can learn more about the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` CRDs by checking the [Prometheus Operator API Docs](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md).
```

## Prerequisites

Before you start to ingest data from a container running in your clusters, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.

> 

Reviewer: I like the "make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you."

Maybe here we could add the part with the "more metrics means more resource cost" like

> Keep in mind that ingesting new metrics into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Mimir is related to the amount of metrics it has to handle. This means ingesting more metrics also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall.
> 
> You can check the resource usage related to your `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` in the Grafana Dashboard \<Name of the Resource Usage per Service Monitor Dashboard> 

Forgot the name of the dashboard :D But yeah something in that direction sure is helpful here.

Author: The dashboards are https://github.com/giantswarm/docs/pull/2247/files#diff-982e0af9b9f3200b73a166ff7f752289fe106c848e963bd411a8a99734c4f821R65 :D 

Do we want to name them again here so going with this suggestion?

```suggestion

Keep in mind that ingesting new metrics into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Mimir is related to the amount of metrics it has to handle. This means ingesting more metrics also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall.

You can check the resource usage related to your ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor in the  `ServiceMonitors Overview` Dashboard  in your installations Grafana.
```

## Creating a ServiceMonitor

> Here is an example showing how to create a [ServiceMonitor](https://github.com/helm/charts/blob/master/stable/prometheus-operator/crds/crd-servicemonitor.yaml) that targets an existing service named `my-service` in the `monitoring` namespace, but the manifests should be similar with any workload as long as you deploy a service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example showing how to create a [ServiceMonitor](https://github.com/helm/charts/blob/master/stable/prometheus-operator/crds/crd-servicemonitor.yaml) for the team `my-name` that targets an existing service named `my-service` in the `monitoring` namespace, but the manifests should be similar with any workload as long as you deploy a service.
```

The bare minimum for a ServiceMonitor looks like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    ## This label is important as it is required for the Prometheus Agent to discover it.
    ## The team name should be the name of your internal team.

>     application.giantswarm.io/team: team-name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    application.giantswarm.io/team: my-team
```

    app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
  name: my-service
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 60s   # Scrape the target every 60s
    path: /metrics  # Path that exposes the metrics
    port: web       # Named port on the service that exposes the metrics
    relabelings: [] # Any potential metric transformation that you want to apply to your metrics.
  selector:         # Label selector that matches your service
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
```

> __Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `application.giantswarm.io/team: team-name` for the Prometheus Agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` for the Prometheus Agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.
```

> To make sure that your containers are being scraped by the monitoring agents, we can only advise you to access your management cluster Grafana and access either the `ServiceMonitors Overview` or `ServiceMonitors Details` dashboards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make sure that your containers are being scraped by the monitoring agents, you can check either the `ServiceMonitors Overview` or `ServiceMonitors Details` dashboards in your installations Grafana.
```

> ## When should I use a PodMonitor?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ServiceMonitor vs. PodMonitor
```

> In most cases, a ServiceMonitor should cover most of your monitoring use cases but it can happen on rare occasions that a container doesn't need a service to run and it doesn't make sense to create one just for the sake of monitoring it. That's when the PodMonitor come into action. You can find a few other examples where PodMonitor makes sense [upstream](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3119).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In most cases, a ServiceMonitor should cover most of your monitoring use cases but it can happen on rare occasions that a container doesn't need a service to run and it doesn't make sense to create one just for the sake of monitoring it. That's when the PodMonitor comes into action. You can find a few other examples where PodMonitor makes sense [in this discussion](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/3119) in the Prometheus Operator Project.
```

---
title: Ingest metrics into the Observability Platform
linkTitle: Metrics

> description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service

Author: ```suggestion
description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service.
```

menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion
    identifier: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion-metrics
weight: 50
last_review_date: 2024-07-11
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - What is a ServiceMonitor?
  - What is a PodMonitor?
  - How do I ingest new metrics?
  - Why do my clusters run the Prometheus Operator?
---

> By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with the [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of multiple [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode` functioning as monitoring agents to be able to collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer 2: Probably nitpicking but shouldn't we call it `kube-prometheus-stack-operator` now instead of `prometheus-operator` ?

Author: No because the operator is still the name :D

> No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platforms monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it is based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platform's monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it is based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator. 
```

> No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platform's monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it is based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator. 

Author: ```suggestion
No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platform's monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it's based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator. 
```

Those allow you to:

- Define where the metrics you want to ingest are (for example the container or port)

> - Transform metrics before ingesting them (for example dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Transform metrics before ingesting them (i.e dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels...)
```
Feel free to ignore this one, I just find it more elegant this way

Author: Well, me to but validators don't agree

You can learn more about the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` CRDs by checking the [Prometheus Operator API Docs](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md).

## Prerequisites

> Before you start to ingest data from a container running in your clusters, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before you start to ingest data from a container running in one of your clusters, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.
```

Author: Does that change anything to the message?

Reviewer 2: From my understanding, in your original sentence you imply that one is going to ingest data from a container running simultaneously in several clusters, which is well... Impossible :sweat_smile: 

But maybe I am the weird one here

Author: Maybe we can just replace it with:
```suggestion
Before you start to ingest data from a running container, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.
```

The bare minimum for a ServiceMonitor looks like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    ## This label is important as it is required for the Prometheus Agent to discover it.
    ## The team name should be the name of your internal team.
    application.giantswarm.io/team: my-team
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
  name: my-service
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 60s   # Scrape the target every 60s
    path: /metrics  # Path that exposes the metrics
    port: web       # Named port on the service that exposes the metrics
    relabelings: [] # Any potential metric transformation that you want to apply to your metrics.
  selector:         # Label selector that matches your service
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
```

__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` for the Prometheus Agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.

> To make sure that your containers are being scraped by the monitoring agents, you can check either the `ServiceMonitors Overview` or `ServiceMonitors Details` dashboards in your installations Grafana.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make sure that your containers are being scraped by the monitoring agents, you can check either the `ServiceMonitors Overview` or `ServiceMonitors Details` dashboards in your installation's Grafana.
```

Those allow you to:

- Define where the metrics you want to ingest are (for example the container or port)
- Transform metrics before ingesting them (for example dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels)

You can learn more about the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` CRDs by checking the [Prometheus Operator API Docs](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md).

## Prerequisites

Before you start to ingest data from a container running in your clusters, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.

Keep in mind that ingesting new metrics into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Mimir is related to the amount of metrics it has to handle. This means ingesting more metrics also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall.

> You can check the resource usage related to your ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor in the  `ServiceMonitors Overview` dashboard in your installations Grafana.

Author: ```suggestion
You can check the resource usage related to your ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor in the  `ServiceMonitors Overview` dashboard in your installation's Grafana.

```

---
title: Ingest metrics into the Observability Platform
linkTitle: Metrics
description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service.
menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion
    identifier: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion-metrics
weight: 50
last_review_date: 2024-07-11
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - What is a ServiceMonitor?
  - What is a PodMonitor?
  - How do I ingest new metrics?
  - Why do my clusters run the Prometheus Operator?
---

> By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with the [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of multiple [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode` functioning as monitoring agents to be able to collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer 3: Simplification suggestions:
```suggestion
By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode`. These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.
```

---
title: Ingest metrics into the Observability Platform
linkTitle: Metrics
description: How to make new metrics available in the Observability Platform in self-service.
menu:
  principal:
    parent: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion
    identifier: tutorials-observability-data-ingestion-metrics
weight: 50

> last_review_date: 2024-07-11

Author: ```suggestion
last_review_date: 2024-07-15
```

owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-atlas
user_questions:
  - What is a ServiceMonitor?
  - What is a PodMonitor?
  - How do I ingest new metrics?
  - Why do my clusters run the Prometheus Operator?
---

> By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode`. These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward cluster critical and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.

Reviewer 4: "cluster critical" sounds strange to me. How about the other way around?

```suggestion
By default, all Giant Swarm clusters are equiped with [Prometheus Operator](https://prometheus-operator.dev/) and a set of [Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/) shards in `agent mode`. These shards are monitoring agents that collect and forward critical cluster and workload metrics to a central [Grafana Mimir](https://grafana.com/oss/mimir/) instance running on the management cluster.
```

> No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platform's monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it's based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) provided by the Prometheus Operator.

Reviewer 4: Plural s is not needed in abbreviations

```suggestion
No workload is the same, especially in the way it exposes its metrics, so the Observability Platform's monitoring configuration needs to be flexible. That's why it's based on the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` Custom Resource Definitions (CRD) provided by the Prometheus Operator.
```

Those allow you to:

- Define where the metrics you want to ingest are (for example the container or port)
- Transform metrics before ingesting them (for example dropping unneeded data, adding extra labels)

You can learn more about the `ServiceMonitor` and `PodMonitor` CRDs by checking the [Prometheus Operator API Docs](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api.md).

## Prerequisites

> Before you start to ingest data from a container running in your clusters, you need to make sure that your application is already [instrumented](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/instrumentation/) to export metrics and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you.

Reviewer 4: I feel that the phrase "and make sure the metrics it provides are useful to you" doesn't really belong into this sentence.

Author: The main Idea is written just below (cost info) so maybe this Can bé moved other there

Keep in mind that ingesting new metrics into the Observability Platform comes with a cost. The resource consumption of the central Mimir is related to the amount of metrics it has to handle. This means ingesting more metrics also leads to higher resource consumption of the Observability Platform overall.

You can check the resource usage related to your ServiceMonitor and PodMonitor in the  `ServiceMonitors Overview` dashboard in your installation's Grafana.

## Creating a ServiceMonitor

Here is an example showing how to create a [ServiceMonitor](https://github.com/helm/charts/blob/master/stable/prometheus-operator/crds/crd-servicemonitor.yaml).
This one targets a service named `my-service` in the `monitoring` namespace, and will route alerts to team `my-team`.  The manifests should be similar with any workload as long as you have a service that exposes the app's metrics.

> The bare minimum for a ServiceMonitor looks like this:

Reviewer: I was just wondering...Should we describe how to use the CR (like "install" it)? Because I guess especially with out GitOps Setup this might confuse some folks. Do you put it into the observability folder of your MC, do you push it against the MC or against the WC and all that...I wouldn't know :D

Author: Well, maybe but I'm not sure how I would phrase it.

I think we should explain that the servicemonitor should be deployed as close as possible with the application so either via gitops, the helm chart and so on. So if you have some thoughts, I'm all ears

Author: Just waiting for ideas hère and then i'll merge :)

```yaml
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    ## This label is important as it is required for the Prometheus Agent to discover it.
    ## The team name should be the name of your internal team.
    application.giantswarm.io/team: my-team
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
  name: my-service
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 60s   # Scrape the target every 60s
    path: /metrics  # Path that exposes the metrics
    port: web       # Named port on the service that exposes the metrics
    relabelings: [] # Any potential metric transformation that you want to apply to your metrics.
  selector:         # Label selector that matches your service
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
```

__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` for the Prometheus Agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.

> To make sure that your containers are being scraped by the monitoring agents, you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards in your installation's Grafana.

Reviewer: Remove this line then

Author: ```suggestion
```

> No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

Author: ```suggestion
No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

```

    application.giantswarm.io/team: my-team
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
  name: my-service
  namespace: monitoring
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 60s   # Scrape the target every 60s
    path: /metrics  # Path that exposes the metrics
    port: web       # Named port on the service that exposes the metrics
    relabelings: [] # Any potential metric transformation that you want to apply to your metrics.
  selector:         # Label selector that matches your service
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/instance: my-service
```

No matter if you are using Helm Charts or GitOps and Kustomize, just put the ServiceMonitor CR next to your app and apply it in the same way. Once it's applied you can check either the _ServiceMonitors Overview_ or _ServiceMonitors Details_ dashboards, or just search for the new metrics ingested in your installation's Grafana to make sure that your containers are being scraped by the new monitoring agents.

__Warning:__ The ServiceMonitor needs to be labeled with `application.giantswarm.io/team: <YOUR-TEAM-NAME>` for the Prometheus Agent to be able to discover it and start collecting metrics.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
